---
layout: single
title: "Transport Layer Protocol: The Big Picture"
classes: wide
toc: true
---

# Connection Establishment
## TCP Segment
### TCP Header
```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|          Source Port          |       Destination Port        | 4 Byte
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Sequence Number                        | 4 Byte
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Acknowledgement Number                     | 4 Byte
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Data |           |U|A|P|R|S|F|                               |
| Offset| Reserved  |R|C|S|S|Y|I|            Window             | 4 Byte
|       |           |G|K|H|T|N|N|                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Checksum            |         Urgent Pointer        | 4 Byte
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Options                    |    Padding    | 40 Byte
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                             Data                              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

#### Port
- Source (ephemeral) : It's dynamically assigned, making each connection unique and preventing port conflicts.
- Destination (fixed) : Identifies the specific service or application on the receiving host (e.g., HTTP uses port 80).

#### Flags
- URG : Signals that certain data should be processed immediately.
- ACK : Confirms receipt of data, ensuring reliable communication.
- PSH (Push) : Forces the immediate sending of data without waiting for a buffer to fill.
- RST (Reset) : Abruptly terminates a connection due to an error or attack.
- SYN : Initiates a connection between two hosts.
- FIN : Gracefully ends a connection.

#### Sequence
- To ensure that TCP segments are sent and ordered correctly.

#### Acknowledgement
- Confirms the receipt of the previous segments.
- Receiver expects the next sequence number from the source is the same number as ack.

#### Options
- Maximum Segment Size (MSS) : Defines the largest segment of data that can be transmitted and optimizes network efficiency by reducing the need for fragmentation.
- Window Scale Factor : Expands the window size for data transmission, allowing for higher throughput.
	- New window size = Window size * 2 Window Scale Factor
- SACK permitted and SACK : Enhances performance by allowing the receiver to acknowledge out-of-order packets.

#### Length
- Specifies how much data is in the segment.

### Data
- Contains the actual payload that is being transmitted.

## Handshake
### 3-Way
- Ensures both sender and receiver are ready to exchange data.

### 4-Way
- Prevents data loss and ensures proper closure of the connection.

---
# Flow Control
- Continuous stream of data without overwhelming the receiver.

## Segmentation
- Ensures that large chunks of data don’t overload the network or receiver.

### Max Segmentation Size (MSS)
- Defines the largest data chunk that can be sent in one segment.
- Helps optimize transmission efficiency by reducing the need for fragmentation.

### MTU
- Determines the maximum packet size that can be transmitted in Datalink layer, usually 1500 byte.

## Buffer
- Temporarily stores data before it’s processed.
- Acts as a cushion, preventing data loss during high traffic periods.

## Data Transfer
- TCP 3-WAY Handshake
- Sequence + Length : ack

## Connection Termination
- The sender (send FIN) who closes the transmission must continue to receive data until the receiver also decides to close the connection (also send FIN).

## Window
- Sender's buffer is 100 byte, receiver's buffer is 70 byte. 
- Focus on receiver's buffer because the flow is controlled by the receiver.
- Packet sent and acknowledged
- Packet sent and not acknowledged
- Packet that can be sent
- Packet that can't be sent

### Receiver Window (RWND)
- Informs the sender how much data it can send.

### Send Window (SWND)
- Determines the amount of unacknowledged data that can be in transit.

---
# Error Control
## Checksum
- Detects errors in transmitted data.
- -ve of (sum of header + data)

## Ack
- Reduces network traffic by confirming multiple segments with a single acknowledgment.

### Piggybacking
- Combines data and acknowledgment in one segment.

### Sack
- Allows the receiver to inform the sender of the exact missing segments.

## Retransmission
- Presumptions
- Ensures that lost or corrupted segments are resent.

### Queue
- Organizes segments that need to be resent.

### Time-out
- Triggers retransmission if no acknowledgment is received within a certain time.

## Out-of-Order Segment
- Receiver didn't receive some segment then receiver send ack with the segment number that lost.

---
# Congestion Control
- Balances data flow to avoid congesting the network, which could lead to packet loss.
- Read more : [RFC2581](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2581)

## Congestion Window (CWND)
- Adjusts the amount of data sent based on network conditions.
- Works with the send window to control the rate of data transmission.

## Rules
- Ensures that data flow is adjusted based on both the sender’s and network’s capacity.
- Uses the minimum of Send Window and Congestion Window to determine the actual amount of data to send.

## Slow Start
- Prevents initial congestion by gradually increasing the data sent.
- To avoid overloading the network.
- Cwnd gradually increase for example: 1, 2, 4, 8, ...
- Read more : [RFC2581](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2581)

## Avoidance
- Minimizes congestion by adjusting the data flow before the network becomes overloaded.
- Uses a threshold to transition from Slow Start to a more stable data flow.

### Threshold
- Defines the point at which the data transmission strategy changes.

## Detection
- Identifies when congestion occurs to adjust the transmission rate.

## Keepalive Timer
- Ensures that idle connections remain open.

## Window Scale Option
- Allows for larger window sizes, supporting high-speed networks.
- Read more : [RFC1323](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1323)

## Selective Acknowledgements (SACK)
- Allows acknowledgment of specific segments, improving retransmission efficiency.
- Read more : [RFC2081](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2081), [SACK](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/selective-acknowledgments-sack-in-tcp/)

---
# What's next?



---
# Resource
- https://sookocheff.com/post/networking/how-does-tcp-work/
- https://hpbn.co/building-blocks-of-tcp/